this is a talk in my series of once
around various solar system objects but
this one's a little different because
we're going to be talking about planet 9
and whether or not in fact there is a
planet 9 in our solar system start with
the business to do with the discovery of
Neptune which I also covered in my talk
called the once around the ice giants in
short Neptune was discovered as a result
of predicting that it must exist in
order to explain the orbit of the path
of Neptune around the Sun which
according to the laws of gravity didn't
seem to make sense unless there was an
additional unseen influence an outer
planet pulling upon it from pulling it
off course and both Jon couch Adams and
urbane Lovera a independently made
predictions which was shown at the
bottom of the screen here and the
locations of those predictions were very
accurate they were within a degree of
the correct position in the sky so very
good calculations indeed given that they
were being done by hand but no sooner
had Neptune been discovered that people
got the idea that perhaps there was the
opportunity to use this technique again
and indeed there seemed to be once they
done the calculations using the presence
of Neptune to try and correct the orbit
of Uranus a small error remaining and
thought perhaps this is the opportunity
and the hint that there's another planet
out there waiting hiding in the dark to
be discovered and many people got on to
this possibility but the most famous is
Percival Lowell shown here wearing his
hat on backwards looking in the enormous
telescope at the left hand side there
and he built using his own money he was
a very wealthy man it's Flagstaff
Observatory in Arizona and hired the
young man called Clyde Tombaugh shown at
the bottom right there with his own
homemade telescope to carry
out a sweep of the sky and look for the
missing now tombow had to take
photographs of the sky repeatedly a few
days apart and look for a moving object
and the plate there for the 1930
discovery of Pluto is shown two arrows
are pointing at a tiny little speck
that's moved between one image and the
other but you really have to look for it
and if you take the arrows away it's
terribly difficult to spot it however
once Pluto was discovered they were able
to calculate its orbit and show that was
248 years which compares to 165 years
for Neptune that's a ratio of three to
two so Neptune knows three orbits for
every two that Pluto does but there was
something rather peculiar about Pluto's
orbit sometimes it was quite a lot
further out than Neptune other times it
would sweep back in and even cross over
and become nearer to the Sun than the
path of Neptune which is quite a
surprise and you can see on the chart
here in 1979 89 and 99 Pluto crossed in
ER to Neptune now you can see the
position of Neptune at those times as
well so a little bit ahead of Pluto
around it's a little bit actually
there's no chance that these two are
going to collide with each other because
each time Pluto reaches that innermost
point Neptune is either roughly half no
a quarter of an orbit away or a quarter
of an orbit away in the other direction
and in fact because of that 3 to 2 ratio
every time Pluto gets to this position
it alternately finds neptune ahead of it
or behind it in the position
shown in the diagram and that's what
keeps it stable because Pluto
alternately sees Neptune dragging on it
pulling it slowing it down or dragging
on it with its gravity and accelerating
it and the two effects cancel out for
every other orbit so the situation
remains the same and as a result they're
never going to approach each other
closely now when Pluto was discovered it
was thought to be explaining this
irregularity in the motion of Neptune
and it was a large planet
well 1978 photographs were taken from
Earth and they just show here in the
rather speckly images towards the
left-hand side at the bottom there the
discovery that Pluto in fact had a moon
core which we now call Sharon and it
says substantial size moon very large
compared to the size of Pluto and just
about see a lump sticking out of the
black image of Pluto on the left-hand
grainy part of the diagram there and
then in the right-hand one its moved as
Charon has disappeared behind Pluto
relative sizes are shown at the top
there with the earth and the moon twelve
hundred twelve thousand kilometers for
the three and a half thousand kilometers
for the moon
Pluto 2300 Charon twelve hundred so
still quite a sizable object and easily
large enough to have pulled itself into
a round shape now it was very fortunate
during the 1980s the orbit of Charon was
such that it was going around and
crossing in front of the face of Pluto
and then disappearing behind it into
Eclipse through a very clever mapping
technique looking at the total overall
brightness and working out which bit of
Pluto we were looking at and whether or
not Charon was in the way hiding it on
us they little map that's rotating
towards the bottom right hand corner was
shown that was created just from the
eclipsing data and the relative
brightnesses
you can see that heart-shaped bright
object that seems to be on the surface
coming around each time and we'll see
that again in later sharper images of
Pluto taken from the New Horizons probe
when it went to visit the system
somebody once joked that Pluto seemed to
be shrinking because it was deemed very
large in fact New York Times first
publications of the announcement of
Pluto talked about it being the size of
Jupiter but by 1931 just a year later
they were estimating that it was about
the size of the earth by 1948 gerald
cooper dutch astronomer was predicting
it actually was rather smaller know near
tenth the size of the earth 1976 that
estimate had shrunk to 1/100 by
Cruikshank and his friends and in 1978
when Sharon was discovered we were
actually able to measure it and discover
that the mass of Pluto was one five
hundredth of their mass of the earth but
had the rate of apparent shrinkage
continued that graph shows that by
nineteen eighty-something Pluto would
have vanished completely if it really
had been shrinking but nobody believed
that that was just a bit of fun they
also else in the outer part of the solar
system in the 1970s some new objects
were discovered and this is object
Cowell now called Chiron that named
object 95 P stroke 2060 it's got those
two designations because they couldn't
quite work out whether it was a comet or
an asteroid the asteroids orbit between
Jupiter and Mars and so this was
orbiting way out in the outer part of
the solar system so it didn't seem right
that's normally where you find comets
but it has no tail and it's been
realized that it's the first of a class
of wandering object and we call them
sent to us for half-man half-goat
because they neither comets nor
asteroids and the second one that was
discovered was pholis 1992 few years
later now the orbit of Chiron there is
shown on the diagram and you can see
that it comes in as close as the orbit
of Saturn and crosses that much in the
same way that Pluto crosses the orbit of
Neptune and then it swings back out and
just crosses the orbit of Uranus at the
outer extreme so it seems like the inner
and outer bounds of its zone of its
orbit are controlled by the two giant
planets Saturn and Uranus there in fact
if we compare that situation on the left
there for Chiron with the second of the
Centaurs pholis that also has its
perihelion a near point dictated by
Saturn and its outer limits is matching
up with the orbit of Neptune so it's as
if it's controlled by those two giant
planets instead now these orbits can't
be stable they eventually they're going
to have an encounter with one of the
giant planets that their orbits cross
and that will probably happen in the
next million years or so now then to
upset the applecart further in 1992 an
object designated qb1 was found by Dave
Jewett and Jane Lew at the Hawaii
Observatory and just seen ringed in the
three images they're a little tiny
moving speck and this had an orbit way
out beyond Pluto it took 290 years and
orbited around at 41 to 46 astronomical
units compared to Pluto's 29 on the
inner side of Neptune 249 in a rather
more elliptical orbit so qb1 had a
rather circular path but it's only a
small object perhaps 150 kilometers in
diameter but the discovery of this led
to people getting very interested in
searching the outer part of the solar
system for new objects
didn't really have been a surprise that
there are new objects out there because
shortly after Pluto was first discovered
Gerald Cooper here shown on the right
suggested that it might be part of a
large group of objects out beyond
Neptune
of course Pluto was believed to be the
size of the earth at that stage but
Gerald was suggesting that maybe there
might be hundreds of thousands and
perhaps like a second asteroid belt out
there and the knowing Cooper belt has
been widely adopted for that idea so the
idea that out there we've got Pluto
marked orbiting in its elliptical orbit
through the realm of the Kuiper belt
which might contain hundreds of
thousands or millions of objects at a
time I put these slides together there
was only 1,500 had been discovered but
there's every reason to believe there
are more
and here are some of the larger ones
that we found top left there we've got
eros right actually is more massive than
Pluto even though it's very slightly
less in diameter and Eris has a moon
called dis no Mia so even these little
planetoids out there in the outer solar
system can have moons Pluto of course we
knew had the moon Charon but since then
we've discovered Hydra Nix Kerberos and
Styx so there are six bodies in that
system at least possibly more mahi-mahi
there that's recently been discovered to
have a moon WOM a rather elliptical
object with two moons and then at the
bottom row here Sedna 2007 Oh R 10 that
hasn't been given a proper name Q R with
its little tiny moon way what an orcas
with vent as it's moving so some very
interesting decent sized worlds out
there in the Kuiper belt beyond Neptune
which is have another look at those
orbits then make talking about Chiron
and pholis the centaurs and Pluto with
its Neptune crossing orbits so if the
inner side of Pluto's orbit is perhaps
controlled by Neptune what's controlling
the outer limit well it does line up
with an object called quar but that's
really rather a small member of the
Kuiper belt so it's not quite clear that
that's the one that's perhaps corralling
Pluto to have that particular orbital
shape rather like the Centaurs out here
the gravity of Neptune is very important
and not only is Pluto
in a three-to-two lock with Neptune but
there are other objects in the same
sorts of ratios these 3 - 2 and 3 to 4
and 3 to 5 ratios with with Neptune the
ones that are three to two are called
poutine O's and then there are other
nicknames like Tootie nose for the ones
that are in a 1 to 2 ratio
with Neptune and qb1 O's that are in the
same ratio as qb1 being the 3 to 5 ratio
and you can see a graph of how many
objects are present so far discovered in
the Kuiper belt versus the distance from
Neptune 30 astronomical units at the
bottom they're going all the way out to
65 you can see there are some very
popular orbits and those are the ones
that have these nice integer ratios with
Neptune that are stable and some rather
unpopular distances where the effective
Neptune's gravity is to destabilize the
orbit here's another way of looking at
that we've got Saturn Uranus and Neptune
and all the centers that have been
discovered plotted in yellow and then
out beyond Neptune we've got the crew
Tino's plotted in red and Pluto amongst
them and orcas another one and then the
Kuiper belt objects in blue and again
we've got a couple of other resonant
positions marked in red and then you can
see Eris they're quite a long way out on
its own in the beginnings of what we
think might be the scattered disk out
beyond the two-to-one ratio in orbital
distance with Neptune an orbital period
with Neptune it seems to sharply cut off
and perhaps there is something out there
controlling that outer part of the
Kuiper belt well so far so good with the
story in the tiny object was discovered
in 2003 by Mike Brown and it's called
Sedna it's about a thousand kilometers
in diameter but its orbit is enormous it
takes 11,400 years to take one lap of
the Sun you can see on the diagram there
the red line is the orbit of Sedna and
the position we discovered is that was
almost its closest approach to the Sun
if it been anywhere else we would have
never seen it it would have been too
faint but the orbits of the known
planets and Pluto they are marked in
purr
all are shown for scale so Pluto goes
from 29 to 49 astronomical units an
astronomical unit remembers the distance
from the earth to the Sun Sedna goes
from 76 roughly where it is now all the
way out to 936 quite incredible it's not
the only object out there 2012 vp 3 1 3
as its designation goes is another
fairly sizable object and its orbits
taking 4268 years going all the way out
to 4 4 6 a you but never approaching the
Sun closer than a Tau so it's got the
largest known perihelion the close
points to the Sun you can see it just
marked in the little red green and blue
positions on the picture there in fact
we've got a group of these objects that
we now call said noids after said no the
first to be discovered and vp 'the 1 1 3
their various other ones with different
designations and these are the positions
of their orbit relative to the Sun and
there is a curious thing that was noted
by Mike Brown and others and that is
that they all have their perihelion on
the same side of the Sun so they all
make their closest approach roughly in
the same spot and then their orbits
point out like the petals of a flower
but a very one-sided flower there over
to the left-hand side of this diagram
now that is very suggestive of the fact
that it's not an accident and we're
thinking that maybe the gravity of some
as yet unknown larger object is
responsible for controlling these orbits
and it's quite possible that there is
planet number 9 a decent size much
larger than Pluto world out there on a
big elliptical orbit that goes around
the Sun and it's currently a long way
out over on the far side
but nevertheless over the millions and
millions of years and many many orbits
its gravity is controlling what's going
on with all of these little said noids
an update for this we found two new
objects 14 SR 3 4 9 and also fitted the
pattern raising the stakes again
pointing towards the idea of planet 9
and 2013 ftp 8 well I came in here and
we're not sure if that ruins the
argument or not it might just be a freak
or it might be another clue to part of
the puzzle now one of the things that's
definitely gone on in the outer parts of
the solar system mathematical
simulations is shown in this little
diagram here which is a simulation of
what happened in the outer part of the
solar system during the first 20 million
years or so of the planets so it begins
there with the Kuiper belt in green and
the outer planets all shown whizzing
around the Sun and then suddenly
something happens and the green is
scattered all over the place and the
eventually the four major planets settle
down so we start here and then about 20
million years in there's an event
something gets scattered out to the side
the green KOICA belt objects are thrown
everywhere and we end up with the four
giant planets that we have now but
you'll note we start with five the only
way we can make the simulations work and
produce the structure of the solar
system that we see today is by starting
with five giant planets and what happens
is that Jupiter migrates inwards as its
hoovering up material and eventually
gets into a two-to-one orbital resonance
with saturn and that is what causes all
of the chaos at the twenty million year
point Uranus and Neptune swapped places
and in the process the fifth giant
planet gets hurled out onto a very very
long orbit
so maybe it's still out there waiting to
be discovered
the search is on we haven't found
anything yet well it out towards the
edge of the solar system we have Voyager
1 and Voyager 2 heading else they've
crossed out into interstellar space now
gone beyond the influence of the solar
wind and the magnetic field of the Sun
into interstellar space and we're still
in touch with those but we think that
that's still not really the end of the
system and way out perhaps a light year
from the Sun so many many times larger
than they coin per belt which is that
little tiny insert right in the center
there is the Oort cloud and the Dutch
astronomer yeah no it suggested that
right out here there might be millions
and millions of small dirty snowballs
that are the hearts of comets that one
day will get deflected down by a
near-miss or a collision down into the
inner solar system and we would see them
as comets and so the whole of the solar
system amazing structure from the inner
planets and the asteroid belt now to
Jupiter Jupiter out to Saturn Uranus
Neptune then Pluto in the Kuiper belt
and then perhaps the scattered disc with
Sedna and the said noids and even Planet
9 well that's not the end because it
goes away beyond that all the way to the
Oort cloud